statistics everybody's like least
favorite topic it must right but it
becomes a lot cooler when instead of
thinking about like the probability of
heads or tails when you're flipping
coins compared to if you kind of
calculate the probability that two
stalls will collide when galaxies
collide
so galaxy collisions or a galaxy merger
aren't really rare occurrences at all we
see them sort of wherever we look in the
universe in fact we think that most
galaxies will undergo a merger with
another galaxy at some point in its
lifetime and those might be piddly
things which we call like a minor merger
where you've got something that's a mass
ratio of one to ten ie like the other
galaxies that's merging with your big
galaxies like tenth the size and then
sometimes you have something that we
call a major merger where two galaxies
are roughly the same size mass number of
stars will come together and merge and
the gravitational forces in those
mergers are ridiculous galaxies
literally get torn apart and they get
taken from these beautiful spiral
structures basically to looking like
blobs
so take the Milky Way for example the
Milky Way has this huge stream of stars
that we call the Sagittarius a stream
there's basically one of these little
minor merges with another galaxy that's
basically been torn apart by gravity as
it's got too close to the Milky Way and
now it's this collection of stars
orbiting rounders that will one day
merge with the Milky Way and look you I
probably won't notice that because it's
just a piddly collection of stars
however also in a sort of local group of
galaxies there's Andromeda galaxy
Andromeda isn't one of the galaxies that
is actually not moving away from us in
this guy Andromeda is actually coming
towards us it has what we call a blue
shift
so in fact Andromeda is actually gonna
merge with the Milky Way in the next two
billion years or so and that's gonna
create what people like to refer to as
milk comida sort of the eventual product
of what will happen when Andromeda comes
and merges with the Milky Way to make
one giant galaxy so mergers are
something we have to understand to be
able to understand not just what's gonna
happen to the Milky Way and the stars
within the Milky Way and therefore the
Sun because the Sun is a star in the
Milky Way but also if we want to
understand how galaxies have evolved
from you know straight after the Big
Bang when they first form to how they
look like now if it mergers are a common
occurrence
so to understand mergers the first thing
you can do is to try and stimulate them
on a computer and just sort of plug in
all of the know
laws of physics and just set two
galaxies two big collections of stars
going towards each other and see what
happens and see what you get
so when you make a simulation you get
like a video of what's actually
happening you know over time in the
merger and what you can do is then
compare that to what you see in the
universe because when you actually
observe these mergers in the universe
they are just snapshots of what's going
on at any different stage in the merger
and so you can sort of piece together
where you see different murders in
different areas of the universe like
almost like a storyboard of what's gonna
happen and so that's an iterative
process because we all see stuff in the
universe that we then say oh we didn't
make that in the simulations we'll have
to feed that back in or we'll see
something in the simulations and say
well do we see that in the universe and
is that a real thing and we'll go
hunting for it and so if there's a lot
of feedback into the two things that
help us better understand this process
so the question is whether two stars
would ever collide when galaxies collide
so if we think about the numbers
involved in like say the Milky Way and
Andromeda colliding the Milky Way it has
like 400 billion stars at most and then
we think Andromeda has like a trillion
so you think with so many stars that the
probability of actually two of those
colliding would be very very high but
that's not necessarily the case if you
think about the space between the Sun
and its nearest star its nearest
neighbor is Proxima Centauri which is
like four and a half light-years or so
away so the ratio between the size of
the Sun and then like the distance to
the nearest star it's not pointe-noire
nor nor nor nor nor nor two present
right it's really really small so there
is a lot of space between the stars
which means there's a lot of space for
other stars coming in in that collision
and so because the galaxy is so empty
you can end up with really quite low
probabilities for actually a collision
happening even in systems of trillions
of stars so let's try and put a number
on this problem right we're gonna make a
couple of sort of simplifying
assumptions to do that the first of
which is sort of to discount
appetit so you could have something that
might not be on a direct collision with
the Sun it might end up just sort of
slingshotting round it instead so we're
going to assume instead to have a
collision you're gonna have to be on
like a direct trajectory to actually
collide with the Sun and then also I'm
going to assume that basically the stars
are evenly distributed around Andromeda
in the Milky Way as well which is not
really the case cuz it will be denser in
the center and obviously you want the
denser collection of spiral arms as well
but as a simplifying assumption is a
pretty decent one so let's run with it
then what we can imagine is that
basically the stars are like particles
in this system that you have and we've
known for a long time how to model how
particles behave in fact it actually
boils down like a chemistry 101 problem
like particles of gas trapped in a box
say hydrogen atoms or helium atoms that
might collide in some volume of box that
you have instead we've got star
particles which admittedly are made of
hydrogen helium and they're trapped in
the box of the Milky Way or the box of
Andromeda well we're actually gonna do
some maths now so in this problem of the
Sun moving through this sort of box of
star particles right the Sun is gonna
trace a cylinder basically through those
particles as it moves right so if you
have this sort of what you can assume is
a box of particles the Sun is just one
particle and it's gonna be moving
through that box at some speed V and
it's gonna take at a time of T to get
across the box okay you're then gonna
have other particles in the Box all of
which it could hit but actually it's
probably gonna miss most of them because
it's mostly empty space right now what
you have to work out is that as the Sun
travels at this speed V which of those
is it going to hit so you have to say
well perhaps only those that directly
hit into the Sun will hit it but
actually if you make the assumption that
your other stars in the Box are about
the same size there's the Sun again the
sun's not that big it's not that small
it's kind of in the middle and an
average so it's a fair assumption to
take that all the stars will be about
the same size of the sir
then you've got to think what happens
when the Sun meets another particle
that's the same size of it right they
could come with a direct collision so
you could count the cylinder as just the
size of the Sun as it travels through
but you could also say that well what if
they come just slightly above it and you
get this glancing collision you have to
count that as a collision of two stars
as well so actually this sort of
cylinder that you're going to have
collisions in is actually twice the size
of the Sun so it's going to be two times
the sun's radius so the number of
collisions you actually have we're going
to call that Z is going to be
proportional to the size of this Sun
cylinder so this is just the area of a
circle so we've got an area of a circle
two times the radio at the Sun so we got
PI R squared but it's to radius of Sun
squared and then that's times basically
by the length of this cylinder that the
Sun traces out and so the length of the
cylinder is its velocity times by the
time it takes right but you've also got
to think about the number density of
particles in this box as well so all of
these ones it will miss but maybe
there's one here that it might hit okay
and so that's going to also dependent on
the number density so that's going to be
the number of particles say in Andromeda
divided by the volume of Andromeda and
again Andromeda if we think about it is
just a disk of a galaxy that's gonna be
a cylinder with some radius times by
some height again so that's nice and
easy and we know the number of stars in
Andromeda we know that was about a
trillion and we know the radius and the
height of Andromeda and we know the
radius of the Sun and we've measured the
speed that the Sun goes around the
galaxy as well this T though I'm going
to assume that sort of the time scale
for emerges so let's say that's it tends
to be between sort of like a billion to
two billion years so let's say it's a
billion for a nice round number so if we
plug all those numbers in you end up
finding that you get one point one times
ten to the minus nine collisions in one
year in a billion years so that's just
the number of collisions you have if
you actually want a probability you have
to think about how many collisions you
could have so for example if you roll a
dice and you get a one well you could
have got a one or two or three or four
or five or six so you know that the
probability of getting a one is 1/6 so
you've got the number of collisions that
occurs but the number of possible
collisions was a trillion right so if
you actually want to calculate the
probability then you need to do the
probability is the Z over the number of
collisions which is just again the
number of stars in Andromeda and so your
probability is actually one point one
times ten to the minus twenty-one or if
you want a percentage it's one point one
times ten to the minus nineteen percent
this 10 to the minus 19 means that
you've got no point and then 18 zeros
and then a 1 so the probability of the
Sun colliding with any one of the
trillion stars in Andromeda galaxy is
about a 1 in a sextillion chance is an
incredibly incredibly small number what
this number gives us is the probability
that one star in the Milky Way will hit
any of the trillion in Andromeda you can
then do 1 minus that number to find out
the probability that the 1 star in the
Milky Way misses all trillion stars in
Andromeda so what you have there is like
this binary assumption right you either
have hit or miss you have two options so
two options is a really nice thing in
stats because it means that you can use
a really nice expression to describe
what probability you have for any of
those two options
hit or miss or yes or no or heads or
tails from happening any number of times
so we can use something called the
binomial expression and you may have
come across this at school because yeah
you did use it for flipping heads and
tails and finding out lift the
probability of getting a head is 0.4
then what's the probability of getting
like 4,000 heads in 8,000 tosses we can
use the exact same maths for saying
instead of what's the probability for
one star to hit any of a trillion stars
what's the probability when you've got
400 billion stars hitting into any of
trillion stars so if you plug all Bo
in the probability that you get one
collision out of like four hundred
billion possible tries is naught point
naught naught naught naught naught
naught and another naught four percent
that is less than one in a billion
chance that any of the stars in the
Milky Way collides with any of the stars
in Andromeda you can even use the same
expression to find what would be the
chance of two collisions occurring in a
merger between Andromeda and the Milky
Way and that's even smaller that's less
in a quintillion chance of having those
two collisions occur so there are
incredibly small numbers all because
there's just so much space between the
stars in galaxies now those numbers
might get bigger if you take into
account that it's denser in the center
and that it's slightly different shape
in the center and also that the stars
aren't always the size of the Sun and
that you've got gravity in there as well
but all of those effects are not going
to be big enough in order to overcome
the fact that you just have so much
space between the stars in the system
and so that's the reason why the
probability is so low for two stars to
collide and two galaxies collide when we
actually observe them in the universe
what we're doing is just taking like a
snapshot I snap chopped okay when you
actually observe a merger in the
universe you you just see a snapshot
snapshot oh my god and so when you
observe the universe these become a
snapshot so when you observe the
universe itself though you essentially
get what is a snapshot I just want to
put like really dramatic music over all
of these like videos of simulations of
galaxies merging like the game of
Thrones theme tune or something but
copyright won't let me so I guess we
just have to imagine it ourselves like
dude